ExpeL: LLM Agents Are Experiential Learners
Andrew Zhao,♠Daniel Huang, ♣Quentin Xu, ♣Matthieu Lin, ♣Yong-Jin Liu, ♣Gao Huang ♠*
♠Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University
♣Department of Computer Science, BNRist, Tsinghua University
{zqc21,huang-jy22,xgd22,lyh21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{liuyongjin,gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
The recent surge in research interest in applying large language models (LLMs) to decision-making tasks has flourished
by leveraging the extensive world knowledge embedded in LLMs. While there is a growing demand to tailor LLMs for
custom decision-making tasks, finetuning them for specific tasks is resource-intensive and may diminish the model’s
generalization capabilities. Moreover, state-of-the-art language models like GPT-4 and Claude are primarily accessible
through API calls, with their parametric weights remaining proprietary and unavailable to the public. This scenario em-
phasizes the growing need for new methodologies that allow learning from agent experiences without requiring paramet-
ric updates. To address these problems, we introduce the Experiential Learning (ExpeL) agent. Our agent autonomously
gathers experiences and extracts knowledge using natural language from a collection of training tasks. At inference, the
agent recalls its extracted insights and past experiences to make informed decisions. Our empirical results highlight the
robust learning efficacy of the ExpeL agent, indicating a consistent enhancement in its performance as it accumulates
experiences. We further explore the emerging capabilities and transfer learning potential of the ExpeL agent through
qualitative observations and additional experiments.1
A computer program is said to learn from experience
E with respect to some class of tasks T and
performance measure P, if its performance at tasks in
T, as measured by P, improves with experience E.
Tom Mitchell
*Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1Visit https://andrewzh112.github.io/#expel for prompts and demos, and https://github.com/LeapLabTHU/ExpeL for code.
arXiv:2308.10144v2  [cs.LG]  18 Dec 2023
