ing (Watkins and Dayan 1992), in which the agent can learn
from experiences of a behavior policy. During the evaluation
stage, the agent attempts unseen tasks with a single try, aug-
mented with extracted insights and successful trajectories in
its experience pool gathered from the training stage. Refer
to Fig. 1 for detailed information on our agent framework.
4.1
Gathering Experiences
To gather diverse experiences that can be useful to extract
information from, we leverage Reflexion (Shinn et al. 2023)
to continuously retry the training task at most Z times.
In particular, the agent will be given a training task tn
at the z-th trial, fewshot examples Fmanual and past reflec-
tions νn,z (initially, νn,0 is the empty string). At first, the
agent will attempt the task with fewshot examples concate-
nated with its current trajectory τn,0 as the context, and
use ReAct (Yao et al. 2023b) as the base planning algo-
rithm, LLMReAct(· | τn,0, Fmanual, νn,0). On the z-th trial,
when the agent finishes the task or the maximum number
of steps H is reached, the ExpeL agent’s experience pool
B ingests the trajectory τn,z. Then, if the agent succeeds,
it moves on to the next task. However, if the agent fails,
it will look at its failed trajectory and self-reflect to pro-
duce νn,z+1 = concat(νn,z, LLMreflect(τn,z)) to see where
it can do better on the next retry, concatenated with the pre-
vious reflections. In the next retry, the agent will augment its
context with reflection νn,z+1, the input to the LLM policy,
LLMReAct(· | τn,z+1, Fmanual, νn,z+1).
To highlight, this trial and error way of gathering expe-
riences not only improves the chances of getting more pos-
itive examples for experience recall during evaluation but
also allows for collecting valuable success/failure pairs used
for comparisons during insight extraction (Sec. 4.2). The
pseudo-code can be found in Alg. 1.
4.2
Learning from Experiences
Human learning occurs mainly either by storing successful
trajectories in memory, which can be later recalled as spe-
cific examples, or by extracting high-level insights from ex-
periences, enabling generalization to novel situations. Ex-
peL considers both of these learning modes to boost task
performance. Concretely, an instruction I given to an LLM
agent can be broken down into task specifications and few-
shot examples. We can augment task specifications with an
agent’s extracted insights from past experiences, where an
instruction-following LLM can be leveraged (OpenAI 2023)
to follow them closely. For fewshot examples, we can al-
low the agent to retrieve from its experience pool with top-k
relevant examples to aid its decisions. Next, we detail our
experience recall and insight extraction mechanisms.
Similar Experiences as Demonstrations
Works have
shown that using in-context examples that are semantically
similar to the task at hand results in better performance (Liu
et al. 2022). Moreover, when involved in a novel situation,
humans also recall from their memory similar tasks they’ve
solved as references when attempting the task (Kahneman
2011). Motivated by these observations, we propose experi-
ence recall to retrieve successful trajectories from the expe-
rience pool gathered during training based on task similarity.
Concretely, we used the Faiss vectorstore (Johnson,
Douze, and J´egou 2019) as the experience pool, kNN re-
triever and all-mpnet-base-v2 (Song et al. 2020) em-
bedder to obtain top-k successful trajectories that have the
maximum inner-product task similarity with the evaluation
task. The advantage of using task similarity as the retrieval
rank is that if the agent repeats a task or does a task simi-
lar to an existing successful trajectory from the experience
pool, the agent only needs to closely imitate the successful
trajectory and have less burden on ability extrapolation.
Learning from Successes and Failures
To leverage the
diverse outcomes gathered during the experience collection
phase, we believe the agent should analyze experiences in
two distinct ways. First, we let the agent compare a failed
trajectory with a successful trajectory for the same task. This
comparison offers a concrete understanding of the agent’s
shortcomings, highlighting the correct and incorrect actions.
Second, we let the agent identify patterns within a set of
successful trajectories from different tasks. This approach
sheds light on common “good practices” that the agent can
adopt to ensure success in evaluation tasks.
For the implementation, we give the agent’s instruction-
following LLMinsights several operators to apply on an ex-
isting set of insights ˆι. We initialize the set of insights to
an empty set ˆι = ∅and iteratively provide the LLM with
fail/success pairs or lists of L successes (created by sam-
pling without replacement) from the experience pool. The
operations the LLM can perform are: ADD a new insight,
EDIT the content of an existing insight, DOWNVOTE to dis-
agree with an existing insight, or UPVOTE to agree with an
existing insight. A newly added insight will have an initial
importance count of two associated with it, and the count
will increment if subsequent operators UPVOTE or EDIT
are applied to it and will decrement when DOWNVOTE is ap-
plied to it. If an insight’s importance count reaches zero, it
will be removed. This particular design choice robustifies the
process since even successful trajectories can be suboptimal
and mislead the generated insights. The prompt template we
used can be found in Fig. 2. We kept the maximum size for a
list of successes to L and used gpt-4-0613 as the default
LLMinsights. We empirically found that gpt-4-0613 is bet-
ter than gpt-3.5-turbo-0613 at following instructions
on how to use the insight extraction operators and halluci-
nated less. Pseudo-code for this process can be found in Alg.
2. Finally, ExpeL utilizes these generated insights ˆι in the
task inference phase, described next.
4.3
Task Inference
After the agent gathers experiences, extracts insights from
them, and sets up a vectorstore of successful trajectories, it
can proceed to the evaluation. For each task, the task specifi-
cations will be augmented with the concatenation of the full
list of extracted insights ˆι = concat(ι1, ι2, ι3, ...), and the
top-k trajectories with the highest task similarity will be re-
trieved and used as fewshot in-context examples, Fsimilar tasks.
Fig. 3 shows an example prompt template structure, and a
