1
Introduction
Machine learning research has long been captivated by the
potential of autonomous agents and their capabilities. In re-
cent times, incorporating large language models into these
agents (Wang et al. 2023b; Xi et al. 2023) has unveiled
a broad spectrum of applications, even extending beyond
academia (Yang et al. 2023a; Nakajima 2023; Significant-
Gravitas 2023). One of the significant advantages of LLMs
lies in their world knowledge, allowing them to be inherently
versatile across various scenarios (Zhao et al. 2023b).
On the one hand, previous works investigated finetun-
ing LLMs with a large number of environment interactions
(Yao et al. 2023c) or with a large amount of human-labeled
datasets (Nakano et al. 2021; Shaw et al. 2023). This class
of methods incurs high computational costs and needs ac-
cess to the LLM’s parametric weights. Furthermore, fine-
tuning an LLM restricts its functionalities and can hurt its
generalization abilities (Du et al. 2022). On the other hand,
prompting methods can augment an LLM with better se-
quential decision-making planning abilities with only a few
in-context examples (Hao et al. 2023; Lin et al. 2023b; Sun
et al. 2023). However, since current LLMs are bounded by
context window size (Tworkowski et al. 2023), these agents
have no recollections of what they have seen, and therefore
no learning can be done outside of a few demonstrations. So,
how can we strike a balance between these paradigms?
We present the Experiential Learning (ExpeL) agent as a
solution. Our agent autonomously gathers experiences from
a collection of training tasks through trial and error. From
these experiences, it derives natural language insights and
employs its own successful experiences as in-context exam-
ples during test time. Our agent’s learning process is analo-
gous to a student studying for an exam and then taking it on
a single attempt, reflecting many real-world situations. Un-
like self-improvement methods like Reflexion (Shinn et al.
2023), our approach emphasizes the importance of retaining
experiences across multiple tasks to enhance agent perfor-
mance. Moreover, ExpeL learns without parameter updates,
making it compatible with powerful closed-source models
like GPT-4 or Claude. Lastly, the experience-gathering step
does not require a large amount of data or human labels.
We evaluated ExpeL on three vastly different domains and
consistently outperformed strong baselines. Additionally,
we showcased a transfer learning scenario where our agent
that accumulated knowledge from source tasks showed pos-
itive forward transfer to target tasks. Finally, we highlighted
some unexpected emerged abilities the ExpeL agent gained.
In summary, our key contributions are as follows: (1) we
introduced ExpeL, a novel LLM agent that autonomously
learns from experience without gradient updates; (2) We
evaluated ExpeL on a diverse set of tasks to showcase its
learning abilities and improvement on top of existing plan-
ning methods; (3) we showed a novel setting of transfer
learning for our LLM agent and demonstrated forward trans-
ferability from source tasks to target tasks. Lastly, we be-
lieve that as planning algorithms and foundational models
continue to improve, ExpeL’s paradigm stands to gain sig-
nificant benefits from their enhanced performances.
2
Related Work
We discuss the most relevant related works in this section.
See Appendix A for detailed discussions on related works.
Prompt-based Learning: Prompt-based learning refines
label prediction tasks by modifying the input context, facili-
tating swift adaptation to new tasks with minimal data (Liu
et al. 2023a). This approach capitalizes on LLMs for an-
swers without parameter tuning as they can be augmented
using in-context learning (Brown et al. 2020). LAMA
(Petroni et al. 2019) and GPT-3 (Brown et al. 2020) are
early works that promoted this formulation. Efforts to reduce
the intricacies of prompt design include automatic reason-
ing chains for NLP (Kojima et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023).
Similarly, the ExpeL agent also autonomously learns from
experiences using extracted insights and self-generated in-
context trajectories by altering the execution prompt.
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG): Retrieval al-
lows LLMs to access databases, mitigating hallucinations
(Li et al. 2022; Wang, Yang, and Wei 2023; Rubin, Herzig,
and Berant 2022; Liu et al. 2022). Retrieval has also been
used to enhance the capabilities of decision-making agents
(Humphreys et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2023a). In contrast
to these works, we focus on retrieving the ExpeL agent’s
self-generated experiences, thus reducing the dependency on
gold examples and leveraging domain-specific corpus.
Planning for LLM Agents: Application of LLM agents
in fields like robotics, natural sciences, game-playing, and
workflows has surged, with emphasis on their world knowl-
edge in fewshot settings (Ha, Florence, and Song 2023;
Mu et al. 2023; Bran et al. 2023; Boiko, MacKnight, and
Gomes 2023; Yang et al. 2023b; Lin et al. 2023a; Nakano
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2023c; Liu et al. 2023b). Moreover,
LLMs have demonstrated promising zero/few-shot planning
and reasoning capabilities in various configurations (Sumers
et al. 2023), including embodied environments and reason-
ing tasks (Huang et al. 2022; Yao et al. 2023a; Wei et al.
2022b; Yao et al. 2023b; Gong et al. 2023).
Self-improvement and Memory for LLM Agents: Agents
like Reflexion showcase feedback-based improvement, yet
often lack cross-task memory (Shinn et al. 2023). Other
agents exhibit potential in persistent memory within multi-
agent contexts (Park et al. 2023; Maas et al. 2023). Our
ExpeL agent combines these approaches, focusing on task-
solving while benefiting from self-generated in-context ex-
amples and abstracted insights from memory.
3
Preliminaries
Complex Interactive Tasks
We work with complex inter-
active tasks where at each time step i ∈{0, . . . , H}, the
agent receives an observation o ∈O, and from its observa-
tion history Ht decides to perform action a ∈A. The ob-
jective of the agent is to achieve some goal g ∈G. We only
deal with deterministic environments in this work.
Large Language Models
A large language model is a
statistical model of the natural language, typically a neu-
ral network. In our setting, we use an autoregressive lan-
guage model (OpenAI 2023; Brown et al. 2020; Touvron
