Figure 1: ExpeL Agent Overview. Left: ExpeL operates in three stages: (1) Collection of success and failure experiences into
a pool. (2) Extraction/abstraction of cross-task knowledge from these experiences. (3) Application of the gained insights and
recall of past successes in evaluation tasks. Right: (A) Illustrates the experience gathering process via Reflexion (Shinn et al.
2023), enabling task reattempt after self-reflection on failures. (B) Illustrates the insight extraction step. When presented with
success/failure pairs or a list of L successes, the agent dynamically modifies an existing list of insights ˆι using operations ADD,
UPVOTE, DOWNVOTE, and EDIT. This process has an emphasis on extracting prevalent failure patterns or best practices.
et al. 2023b,a; Chowdhery et al. 2023), which given an or-
dered list of existing tokens x = {x1, x2, ..., xl−1}, outputs
the probability of the next token p(xl | x<l). An instruction-
following LLM (Thoppilan et al. 2022; Chung et al. 2022;
Wei et al. 2022a) is typically finetuned on various NLP tasks
that are formatted into instruction, input, response tuples
(Taori et al. 2023). Instruction-tuned models are better at
following natural language instructions which alleviates the
need for heavy prompt engineering (Wei et al. 2022a).
ReAct and Reflexion
ReAct (Yao et al. 2023b) and Re-
flexion (Shinn et al. 2023) are promising frameworks en-
abling the aforementioned proficiency of LLMs in reason-
ing and self-improvement. ReAct explicitly intertwines ob-
servations, actions, and thoughts, providing a foundation for
robust planning and reasoning capabilities. Building upon
it, Reflexion introduces an additional reflective step before
reattempting the subsequent trial of the same task, enhanc-
ing the model’s adaptive learning process.
4
ExpeL: An Experiential Learning Agent
Recent advancements in generative LLMs suggest an in-
triguing approach. Rather than altering the LLM param-
eters, adjusting the prompts may be more beneficial: this
strategy ensures that the LLM’s inherent common sense
knowledge remains intact, allowing for superior generaliza-
tion (Liu et al. 2023a). Furthermore, some of the most po-
tent language models are proprietary (OpenAI 2023; An-
thropic 2023). Thus, focusing on prompt-based methods
seems promising as a way to harness the strengths of these
advanced LLMs. Additionally, previous works on learning
in LLM agents have primarily been trained on extensive
human-labeled datasets (Lin et al. 2023a; Shaw et al. 2023)
or improved via iterative retries (Shinn et al. 2023) on a sin-
gle task. A relatively less explored area is facilitating agents
to learn autonomously from their own experiences, similar
to a student gaining insights from practicing for an exam.
The student tackles practice problems multiple times to de-
rive insights. At the exam, the student rely solely on these
insights and draw memories of similar problems to answer
the questions with one attempt. With this in mind, we wish to
design an LLM agent that autonomously gathers experiences
and extracts insights, then uses these cross-task insights and
memories of similar tasks to aid its decision-making.
We aim to enhance a planning LLM agent, such as Re-
Act, with learning abilities that allow it to improve through
inter-task experiences without any parameter updates. In-
spired by the cognitive abilities inherent in human learning,
as well as the benefits observed in self-learning autonomous
agents and the progress made in prompt-based methods, we
developed the Experiential Learning (ExpeL) agent. During
the training stage, the agent interacts with the environment,
gathering experiences via trial and error. These experiences
are stored in an experience pool (Lin 1992). From this pool,
the agent later extracts insights, similar to off-policy learn-
