Language Agent Tree Search Unifies Reasoning, Acting, and Planning in Language Models
Figure 2. Overview of the six operations in LATS. A node is selected, expanded, evaluated, then simulated until a terminal node is reached,
and then the resulting value is backpropagated. If the trajectory fails, a reflection is generated and used as additional context for future
trials. These operations are performed in succession until the budget is reached or the task is successful.
depicted in Fig. 2, LATS consists of a series of operations
– selection, expansion, evaluation, simulation, backpropa-
gation, and reflection – performed in succession until the
task is successfully completed or a computational limit is
reached after sampling k trajectories. The full pseudocode
of LATS can be found in Sec. A in the Appendix.
Selection. In the first operation, the algorithm identifies
a segment of the current tree most suitable for subsequent
expansion. Starting from the root node, denoted as the initial
state s0, a child node is selected at each tree level until a leaf
node is reached. To balance exploration and exploitation,
we use the UCT algorithm as shown in Eq. 1.
Expansion. After selecting a node, the second operation
expands the tree by sampling n actions from pθ, as described
in the prior section. The environment receives each action
and returns corresponding feedback as an observation. This
results in n new child nodes added to the tree. This tree is
stored in an external long-term memory structure.
Evaluation. The third operation assigns a scalar value to
each new child node for selection and backpropagation.
This value effectively quantifies the agent’s progress in task
completion, serving as a heuristic to steer the search algo-
rithm towards the most promising regions of the tree. As
LATS does not involve training, we propose a novel value
function for this setting based on two components: (1) a
self-generated LM score and (2) a self-consistency score.
Inspired by ToT, we repurpose pθ into a value function by
prompting it to reason about a given state. To obtain a scalar
value, we instruct pθ to end its reasoning trace with a score
indicating the correctness of the trajectory. Our key distinc-
tion from ToT is that we obtain this value after obtaining
the environmental feedback, improving value assignment.
This also enables scaling to more challenging environments,
as it is difficult for LMs to improve their responses with-
out external feedback (Huang et al., 2024). Additionally,
to further improve value assignment, we introduce an ad-
ditional heuristic based on self-consistency (Wang et al.,
2022), in which actions sampled multiple times at the same
state tend to be more accurate. This results in the overall
value function:
V (s) = λ ∗LM(s) + (1 −λ) ∗SC(s),
(2)
where λ is a hyperparameter. Notably, our method offers
enhanced flexibility over programmed heuristics (Campbell
et al., 2002) and greater efficiency than learned heuristics
(Silver et al., 2017).
Simulation. The fourth operation expands the currently se-
lected node until a terminal state is reached. At each depth
level, we sample and evaluate nodes with the same opera-
tions but prioritize nodes of the highest value. Reaching a
terminal state provides objective feedback on the correct-
ness of a trajectory. If the task is completed successfully,
then LATS terminates the search. If the solution is partially
successful or unsuccessful, then we perform two additional
operations as described below. The success of a trajectory is
determined by the design of the specific environment, such
as finalizing a purchase in web navigation environments.
Backpropagation. This operation updates the values of the
tree based on the outcome of a trajectory. For each node
s0, s1, . . . , sl in the trajectory from root (initial state s0)
of the searching tree to leaf (terminal state sl), its value is
updated to reflect the outcome of the simulation by N(si) =
N(si−1)+1 and V (si) = V (si−1)N(si−1)+r
N(si)
, where r is the
reward. These updated values are used in the UCT formula
(Eq. 1) to guide the selection of the next node.
Reflection. In addition to the environmental feedback, we
leverage self-reflection to further refine the decision-making
5
