Language Agent Tree Search Unifies Reasoning, Acting, and Planning in
Language Models
Andy Zhou 1 2 Kai Yan 1 Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman 1 Haohan Wang 1 Yu-Xiong Wang 1
Abstract
While language models (LMs) have shown po-
tential across a range of decision-making tasks,
their reliance on simple acting processes limits
their broad deployment as autonomous agents. In
this paper, we introduce Language Agent Tree
Search (LATS) – the first general framework that
synergizes the capabilities of LMs in reasoning,
acting, and planning. By leveraging the in-context
learning ability of LMs, we integrate Monte Carlo
Tree Search into LATS to enable LMs as agents,
along with LM-powered value functions and
self-reflections for proficient exploration and en-
hanced decision-making. A key feature of our ap-
proach is the incorporation of an environment for
external feedback, which offers a more deliberate
and adaptive problem-solving mechanism that sur-
passes the constraints of existing techniques. Our
experimental evaluation across diverse domains,
including programming, interactive question-
answering (QA), web navigation, and math, val-
idates the effectiveness and generality of LATS
in decision-making while maintaining compet-
itive or improved reasoning performance. No-
tably, LATS achieves state-of-the-art pass@1 ac-
curacy (92.7%) for programming on HumanEval
with GPT-4 and demonstrates gradient-free per-
formance (average score of 75.9) comparable to
gradient-based fine-tuning for web navigation on
WebShop with GPT-3.5.
Code can be found
at
https://github.com/lapisrocks/
LanguageAgentTreeSearch.
1. Introduction
General autonomous agents capable of reasoning and
decision-making in a variety of environments (Wooldridge
1University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. 2Lapis Labs. Corre-
spondence to: Andy Zhou <andyz3@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
Figure 1. Overview of LATS. Serving as a unified framework,
LATS leverages an external environment and an MCTS-based
search algorithm to improve reasoning and decision-making.
and Jennings, 1995) have been of longstanding interest in
the field of artificial intelligence. While this has tradition-
ally been studied in reinforcement learning, the recent rise
of language models (LMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdh-
ery et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023) with
strong reasoning and general adaptability offers an alter-
native paradigm. Not only have LMs excelled in standard
natural language processing (NLP) tasks such as summariza-
tion (Nallapati et al., 2016) and language inference (Bow-
man et al., 2015), but they have also been adapted to an
increasingly diverse set of tasks that often require advanced
common-sense reasoning or quantitative skills (Cobbe et al.,
2021; Saparov and He, 2023). In addition, LMs are capable
of performing in complex environments that involve knowl-
edge and reasoning, such as web navigation (Yao et al.,
2022; Deng et al., 2023), tool-use (Schick et al., 2023), and
open-ended games (Fan et al., 2022).
Reasoning and acting abilities have been further improved
by prompting techniques that augment LMs with feedback
or observations from an external environment, as exempli-
fied by ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) and other work (Gao et al.,
2023; Shinn et al., 2023). This eliminates the need to rely en-
tirely on the base abilities of LMs, enhancing them through
external tools or semantic feedback. Despite such strengths,
these methods are reflexive and fall short of humans’ deliber-
ate and thoughtful decision-making characteristics to solve
problems (Sloman, 1996; Evans, 2010). In particular, they
fail to consider multiple reasoning paths or to plan ahead.
Recent search-guided LM work (Xie et al., 2023; Yao et al.,
2023a; Hao et al., 2023) addresses this issue by searching
over multiple reasoning chains. While enabling planning,
1
