Reflexion: Language Agents with
Verbal Reinforcement Learning
Noah Shinn
Northeastern University
noahshinn024@gmail.com
Federico Cassano
Northeastern University
cassano.f@northeastern.edu
Ashwin Gopinath
MIT
agopi@mit.edu
Karthik Narasimhan
Princeton University
karthikn@princeton.edu
Shunyu Yao
Princeton University
shunyuy@princeton.edu
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have been increasingly used to interact with exter-
nal environments (e.g., games, compilers, APIs) as goal-driven agents. However,
it remains challenging for these language agents to quickly and efficiently learn
from trial-and-error as traditional reinforcement learning methods require exten-
sive training samples and expensive model fine-tuning. We propose Reflexion, a
novel framework to reinforce language agents not by updating weights, but in-
stead through linguistic feedback. Concretely, Reflexion agents verbally reflect
on task feedback signals, then maintain their own reflective text in an episodic
memory buffer to induce better decision-making in subsequent trials. Reflexion is
flexible enough to incorporate various types (scalar values or free-form language)
and sources (external or internally simulated) of feedback signals, and obtains
significant improvements over a baseline agent across diverse tasks (sequential
decision-making, coding, language reasoning). For example, Reflexion achieves a
91% pass@1 accuracy on the HumanEval coding benchmark, surpassing the previ-
ous state-of-the-art GPT-4 that achieves 80%. We also conduct ablation and analysis
studies using different feedback signals, feedback incorporation methods, and agent
types, and provide insights into how they affect performance. We release all code,
demos, and datasets at https://github.com/noahshinn024/reflexion.
1
Introduction
Recent works such as ReAct [30], SayCan [1], Toolformer [22], HuggingGPT [23], generative
agents [19], and WebGPT [17] have demonstrated the feasibility of autonomous decision-making
agents that are built on top of a large language model (LLM) core. These methods use LLMs to
generate text and ‘actions‘ that can be used in API calls and executed in an environment. Since
they rely on massive models with an enormous number of parameters, such approaches have been
so far limited to using in-context examples as a way of teaching the agents, since more traditional
optimization schemes like reinforcement learning with gradient descent require substantial amounts
of compute and time.
In this paper, we propose an alternative approach called Reflexion that uses verbal reinforcement
to help agents learn from prior failings. Reflexion converts binary or scalar feedback from the
environment into verbal feedback in the form of a textual summary, which is then added as additional
context for the LLM agent in the next episode. This self-reflective feedback acts as a ‘semantic’
gradient signal by providing the agent with a concrete direction to improve upon, helping it learn
from prior mistakes to perform better on the task. This is akin to how humans iteratively learn to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
