Action
Obs / Reward
Trajectory
(short-term memory)
Experience
(long-term memory)
Self-reflection (LM)
Agent
Actor (LM)
Environment
Evaluator (LM)
External feedback
Internal
feedback
Reflective
text
Algorithm 1 Reinforcement via self-reflection
Initialize Actor, Evaluator, Self-Reflection:
Ma, Me, Msr
Initialize policy πθ(ai|si), θ = {Ma, mem}
Generate initial trajectory using πθ
Evaluate τ0 using Me
Generate initial self-reflection sr0 using Msr
Set mem ←[sr0]
Set t = 0
while Me not pass or t < max trials do
Generate τt = [a0, o0, . . . ai, oi] using πθ
Evaluate τt using Me
Generate self-reflection srt using Msr
Append srt to mem
Increment t
end while
return
Figure 2: (a) Diagram of Reflexion. (b) Reflexion reinforcement algorithm
of text and action generation within the Reflexion framework, providing valuable insights into their
performance and effectiveness. In addition, we also add a memory component mem that provides
additional context to this agent. This adaption was inspired by Brooks et al. [3], who suggest a policy
iteration approach using in-context learning. Details on how this is populated are provided below.
Evaluator
The Evaluator component of the Reflexion framework plays a crucial role in assessing
the quality of the generated outputs produced by the Actor. It takes as input a generated trajectory
and computes a reward score that reflects its performance within the given task context. Defining
effective value and reward functions that apply to semantic spaces is difficult, so we investigate
several variants of the Evaluator model. For reasoning tasks, we explore reward functions based
on exact match (EM) grading, ensuring that the generated output aligns closely with the expected
solution. In decision-making tasks, we employ pre-defined heuristic functions that are tailored to
specific evaluation criteria. Additionally, we experiment with using a different instantiation of an
LLM itself as an Evaluator, generating rewards for decision-making and programming tasks. This
multi-faceted approach to Evaluator design allows us to examine different strategies for scoring
generated outputs, offering insights into their effectiveness and suitability across a range of tasks.
Self-reflection
The Self-Reflection model instantiated as an LLM, plays a crucial role in the
Reflexion framework by generating verbal self-reflections to provide valuable feedback for future
trials. Given a sparse reward signal, such as a binary success status (success/fail), the current trajectory,
and its persistent memory mem, the self-reflection model generates nuanced and specific feedback.
This feedback, which is more informative than scalar rewards, is then stored in the agent’s memory
(mem). For instance, in a multi-step decision-making task, when the agent receives a failure signal, it
can infer that a specific action ai led to subsequent incorrect actions ai+1 and ai+2. The agent can
then verbally state that it should have taken a different action, a′
i, which would have resulted in a′
i+1
and a′
i+2, and store this experience in its memory. In subsequent trials, the agent can leverage its past
experiences to adapt its decision-making approach at time t by choosing action a′
i. This iterative
process of trial, error, self-reflection, and persisting memory enables the agent to rapidly improve its
decision-making ability in various environments by utilizing informative feedback signals.
Memory
Core components of the Reflexion process are the notion of short-term and long-term
memory. At inference time, the Actor conditions its decisions on short and long-term memory, similar
to the way that humans remember fine-grain recent details while also recalling distilled important
experiences from long-term memory. In the RL setup, the trajectory history serves as the short-term
memory while outputs from the Self-Reflection model are stored in long-term memory. These two
memory components work together to provide context that is specific but also influenced by lessons
4
