learned over several trials, which is a key advantage of Reflexion agents over other LLM action
choice works.
The Reflexion process
Reflexion is formalized as an iterative optimization process in 1. In the
first trial, the Actor produces a trajectory τ0 by interacting with the environment. The Evaluator then
produces a score r0 which is computed as rt = Me(τ0). rt is only a scalar reward for trial t that
improves as task-specific performance increases. After the first trial, to amplify r0 to a feedback form
that can be used for improvement by an LLM, the Self-Reflection model analyzes the set of {τ0, r0}
to produce a summary sr0 which is stored in the memory mem. srt is a verbal experience feedback
for trial t. The Actor, Evaluator, and Self-Reflection models work together through trials in a loop
until the Evaluator deems τt to be correct. As mentioned in 3, the memory component of Reflexion
is crucial to its effectiveness. After each trial t, srt, is appended mem. In practice, we bound mem
by a maximum number of stored experiences, Ω(usually set to 1-3) to adhere to max context LLM
limitations.
4
Experiments
We evaluate various natural language RL setups on decision-making, reasoning, and code generation
tasks. Specifically, we challenge an agent to perform search-based question answering on HotPotQA
[28], multi-step tasks in common household environments in AlfWorld [24], and code writing tasks
in competition-like environments with interpreters and compilers in HumanEval [6], MBPP [2],
and LeetcodeHard, a new benchmark. Most notably, Reflexion improves performance over strong
baselines by 22% in AlfWorld, 20% in HotPotQA, and 11% on HumanEval.
4.1
Sequential decision making: ALFWorld
AlfWorld is a suite of text-based environments that challenge an agent to solve multi-step tasks
in a variety of interactive environments based on TextWorld [8]. Following Yao et al. [30], we
run the agent in 134 AlfWorld environments across six different tasks, including finding hidden
objects (e.g., finding a spatula in a drawer), moving objects (e.g., moving a knife to the cutting
board), and manipulating objects with other objects (e.g., chilling a tomato in the fridge). We use
ReAct [30] as the action generator as Yao et al. [30] has shown success in long trajectory decision-
making using explicit intermediate thoughts. AlfWorld tasks naturally require a self-evaluation step
as the environment can only signal if a task is complete. To achieve fully autonomous behavior,
we implement two self-evaluation techniques: natural language classification using an LLM and a
hand-written heuristic. The heuristic is simple: if the agent executes the same action and receives the
same response for more than 3 cycles, or if the number of actions taken in the current environment
exceeds 30 (inefficient planning), we self-reflect. In the baseline runs, if self-reflection is suggested,
we skip the self-reflection process, reset the environment, and start a new trial. In the Reflexion runs,
the agent uses self-reflection to find its mistake, update its memory, reset the environment, and start a
new trial. To avoid very long prompt windows that may exceed the maximum limit, we truncate the
agent’s memory to the last 3 self-reflections (experiences).
To avoid syntactic errors, we provide two domain-specific few-shot trajectories to the agent. We use
the same few-shot trajectory examples as Yao et al. [30] with GPT-3 for the LLM. AlfWorld tasks,
ReAct few-shot prompts, and Reflexion examples are included in the appendix.
Results
ReAct + Reflexion significantly outperforms ReAct by completing 130 out of 134 tasks
using the simple heuristic to detect hallucinations and inefficient planning. Further, ReAct + Reflexion
learns to solve additional tasks by learning in 12 consecutive trials. In the ReAct-only approach, we
see that performance increase halts between trials 6 and 7.
Analysis
A common error in baseline failed AlfWorld trajectories is when an agent thinks that it
has possession of an item but does not actually have the item. The agent proceeds to execute several
actions in a long trajectory and is not able to backtrack its actions to find the mistake. Reflexion
eliminates almost all of these cases by using self-reflection to distill long, failed trajectories into
relevant experiences that can are used as "self-hints" in the future. There are two main cases in which
long-term memory helps an agent in AlfWorld: 1) An early mistake in a long trajectory can be easily
identified. The agent can suggest a new action choice or even a new long-term plan. 2) There are too
5
