Chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting [38] was proposed to address cases where the mapping of
input x to output y is non-trivial (e.g. when x is a math question and y is the final numerical answer).
The key idea is to introduce a chain of thoughts z1, · · · , zn to bridge x and y, where each zi is a
coherent language sequence that serves as a meaningful intermediate step toward problem solving
(e.g. zi could be an intermediate equation for math QA). To solve problems with CoT, each thought
zi ∼pCoT
θ
(zi | x, z1···i−1) is sampled sequentially, then the output y ∼pCoT
θ
(y|x, z1···n). In
practice, [z1···n, y] ∼pCoT
θ
(z1···n, y|x) is sampled as a continuous language sequence, and the
decomposition of thoughts (e.g. is each zi a phrase, a sentence, or a paragraph) is left ambiguous.
Self-consistency with CoT (CoT-SC) [36] is an ensemble approach that samples k i.i.d. chains
of thought: [z(i)
1···n, y(i)] ∼pCoT
θ
(z1···n, y|x) (i = 1 · · · k), then returns the most frequent output:
arg maxy #{i | y(i) = y}. CoT-SC improves upon CoT, because there are generally different
thought processes for the same problem (e.g. different ways to prove the same theorem), and the
output decision can be more faithful by exploring a richer set of thoughts. However, within each
chain there is no local exploration of different thought steps, and the “most frequent” heuristic only
applies when the output space is limited (e.g. multi-choice QA).
3
Tree of Thoughts: Deliberate Problem Solving with LM
A genuine problem-solving process involves the repeated use of available informa-
tion to initiate exploration, which discloses, in turn, more information until a way
to attain the solution is finally discovered.—— Newell et al. [21]
Research on human problem-solving suggests that people search through a combinatorial problem-
space – a tree where the nodes represent partial solutions, and the branches correspond to operators
that modify them [21, 22]. Which branch to take is determined by heuristics that help to navigate the
problem-space and guide the problem-solver towards a solution. This perspective highlights two key
shortcomings of existing approaches that use LMs to solve general problems: 1) Locally, they do not
explore different continuations within a thought process – the branches of the tree. 2) Globally, they
do not incorporate any type of planning, lookahead, or backtracking to help evaluate these different
options – the kind of heuristic-guided search that seems characteristic of human problem-solving.
To address these shortcomings, we introduce Tree of Thoughts (ToT), a paradigm that allows LMs to
explore multiple reasoning paths over thoughts (Figure 1(c)). ToT frames any problem as a search
over a tree, where each node is a state s = [x, z1···i] representing a partial solution with the input and
the sequence of thoughts so far. A specific instantiation of ToT involves answering four questions:
1. How to decompose the intermediate process into thought steps; 2. How to generate potential
thoughts from each state; 3. How to heuristically evaluate states; 4. What search algorithm to use.
1. Thought decomposition. While CoT samples thoughts coherently without explicit decomposition,
ToT leverages problem properties to design and decompose intermediate thought steps. As Table 1
shows, depending on different problems, a thought could be a couple of words (Crosswords), a line of
equation (Game of 24), or a whole paragraph of writing plan (Creative Writing). In general, a thought
should be “small” enough so that LMs can generate promising and diverse samples (e.g. generating
a whole book is usually too “big” to be coherent), yet “big” enough so that LMs can evaluate its
prospect toward problem solving (e.g. generating one token is usually too “small” to evaluate).
2. Thought generator G(pθ, s, k). Given a tree state s = [x, z1···i], we consider two strategies to
generate k candidates for the next thought step:
(a) Sample i.i.d. thoughts from a CoT prompt (Creative Writing, Figure 4):
z(j)
∼
pCoT
θ
(zi+1|s) = pCoT
θ
(zi+1|x, z1···i) (j = 1 · · · k). This works better when the thought
space is rich (e.g. each thought is a paragraph), and i.i.d. samples lead to diversity;
(b) Propose thoughts sequentially using a “propose prompt” (Game of 24, Figure 2; Crosswords,
Figure 6): [z(1), · · · , z(k)] ∼ppropose
θ
(z(1···k)
i+1
| s). This works better when the thought
space is more constrained (e.g. each thought is just a word or a line), so proposing different
thoughts in the same context avoids duplication.
3. State evaluator V (pθ, S). Given a frontier of different states, the state evaluator evaluates the
progress they make towards solving the problem, serving as a heuristic for the search algorithm
to determine which states to keep exploring and in which order. While heuristics are a standard
approach to solving search problems, they are typically either programmed (e.g. DeepBlue [3]) or
3
