learned (e.g. AlphaGo [29]). We propose a third alternative, by using the LM to deliberately reason
about states. When applicable, such a deliberate heuristic can be more flexible than programmed
rules, and more sample-efficient than learned models. Similar to the thought generator, we consider
two strategies to evaluate states either independently or together:
(a) Value each state independently: V (pθ, S)(s) ∼pvalue
θ
(v|s) ∀s ∈S, where a value
prompt reasons about the state s to generate a scalar value v (e.g. 1-10) or a classifica-
tion (e.g. sure/likely/impossible) that could be heuristically turned into a value. The basis
of such evaluative reasoning can vary across problems and thought steps. In this work, we
explore evaluation via few lookahead simulations (e.g. quickly confirm that 5, 5, 14 can
reach 24 via 5 + 5 + 14, or “hot l” can mean “inn” via filling “e” in “ ”) plus commonsense
(e.g. 1 2 3 are too small to reach 24, or no word can start with “tzxc”). While the former
might promote “good” states, the latter could help eliminate “bad” states. Such valuations
do not need to be perfect, and only need to be approximately helpful for decision making.
(b) Vote across states: V (pθ, S)(s) = 1[s = s∗], where a “good” state s∗∼pvote
θ
(s∗|S) is
voted out based on deliberately comparing different states in S in a vote prompt. When
problem success is harder to directly value (e.g. passage coherency), it is natural to to instead
compare different partial solutions and vote for the most promising one. This is similar
in spirit to a “step-wise” self-consistency strategy, i.e. cast “which state to explore” as a
multi-choice QA, and use LM samples to vote for it.
For both strategies, we could prompt the LM multiple times to aggregate the value or vote results to
trade time/resource/cost for more faithful/robust heuristics.
Algorithm 1 ToT-BFS(x, pθ, G, k, V, T, b)
Require: Input x, LM pθ, thought generator G()
& size limit k, states evaluator V (), step limit T,
breadth limit b.
S0 ←{x}
for t = 1, · · · , T do
S′
t ←{[s, z] | s ∈St−1, zt ∈G(pθ, s, k)}
Vt ←V (pθ, S′
t)
St ←arg maxS⊂S′
t,|S|=b
P
s∈S Vt(s)
end for
return G(pθ, arg maxs∈ST VT (s), 1)
Algorithm 2 ToT-DFS(s, t, pθ, G, k, V, T, vth)
Require: Current state s, step t, LM pθ, thought
generator G() and size limit k, states evaluator
V (), step limit T, threshold vth
if t > T then record output G(pθ, s, 1)
end if
for s′ ∈G(pθ, s, k) do
▷sorted candidates
if V (pθ, {s′})(s) > vthres then ▷pruning
DFS(s′, t + 1)
end if
end for
4. Search algorithm. Finally, within the ToT framework, one can plug and play different search
algorithms depending on the tree structure. We explore two relatively simple search algorithms and
leave more advanced ones (e.g. A* [11], MCTS [2]) for future work:
(a) Breadth-first search (BFS) (Algorithm 1) maintains a set of the b most promising states
per step. This is used for Game of 24 and Creative Writing where the tree depth is limit
(T ≤3), and initial thought steps can be evaluated and pruned to a small set (b ≤5).
(b) Depth-first search (DFS) (Algorithm 2) explores the most promising state first, until the
final output is reached (t > T), or the state evaluator deems it impossible to solve the
problem from the current s (V (pθ, {s})(s) ≤vth for a value threshold vth). In the latter
case, the subtree from s is pruned to trade exploration for exploitation. In both cases, DFS
backtracks to the parent state of s to continue exploration.
Conceptually, ToT has several benefits as a method for general problem-solving with LMs: (1) Gener-
ality. IO, CoT, CoT-SC, and self-refinement can be seen as special cases of ToT (i.e. trees of limited
depth and breadth; Figure 1). (2) Modularity. The base LM, as well as the thought decomposition,
generation, evaluation, and search procedures can all be varied independently. (3) Adaptability.
Different problem properties, LM capabilities, and resource constraints can be accommodated. (4)
Convenience. No extra training is needed, just a pre-trained LM is sufficient. The next section will
show how these conceptual benefits translate to strong empirical performance in different problems.
4
Experiments
We propose three tasks that are hard even when sampling from the state-of-the-art language model,
GPT-4 [23], using standard IO prompting or chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting. We show how
4
