Inventory (5/36): {'oak_planks': 3, 'stick': 
4, 'crafting_table': 1, 'stone': 3, 
'wooden_pickaxe': 1}
Biome: river
Inventory (4/36): {'sugar_cane': 3, 'paper': 
3, 'fishing_rod': 1, 'wooden_pickaxe': 1}
Nearby entities: pig, cat, villager
Health: 12/20
Hunger: 0/20
Inventory (6/36): {'furnace': 1, 
'stone_pickaxe': 1, 'oak_planks': 7, 
'crafting_table': 1, 'raw_iron': 4, 'coal': 1} 
Time: night
Nearby entities: zombie
Equipment: 'stone_sword', 'shield'
Reasoning: Since you have a wooden pickaxe and some stones, it would be 
beneficial to upgrade your pickaxe to a stone pickaxe for better efficiency.
Task: Craft 1 stone pickaxe.
Reasoning: Since you have a fishing rod in your inventory and you are near a river 
biome, it would be a good opportunity to catch some fish for food and experience. 
Task: Catch 1 fish.
Reasoning: Your hunger is at 0, which means you need to find food to replenish 
your hunger. Since there are pigs nearby, you can kill one to obtain raw porkchops.
Task: Kill 1 pig.
Reasoning: You have raw iron and coal, and you have a furnace. It's time to smelt 
the iron to make iron ingots, which can be used to craft better tools and armor.
Task: Smelt 4 raw iron.
Reasoning: Since it's night and there's a zombie nearby, it's a good opportunity to 
try killing the zombie now that you have a stone sword and a shield equipped.
Task: Kill 1 zombie.
GPT-4
GPT-4
GPT-4
GPT-4
GPT-4
Figure 3: Tasks proposed by the automatic curriculum. We only display the partial prompt for brevity.
See Appendix, Sec. A.3 for the full prompt structure.
Each program is indexed by the embedding of its description, which can be retrieved in similar
situations in the future. Complex skills can be synthesized by composing simpler programs, which
compounds VOYAGER’s capabilities rapidly over time and alleviates catastrophic forgetting in other
continual learning methods [31, 32].
However, LLMs struggle to produce the correct action code consistently in one shot [41]. To address
this challenge, we propose an iterative prompting mechanism that: (1) executes the generated
program to obtain observations from the Minecraft simulation (such as inventory listing and nearby
creatures) and error trace from the code interpreter (if any); (2) incorporates the feedback into GPT-4’s
prompt for another round of code refinement; and (3) repeats the process until a self-verification
module confirms the task completion, at which point we commit the program to the skill library (e.g.,
craftStoneShovel() and combatZombieWithSword()) and query the automatic curriculum for
the next milestone (Fig. 2).
Empirically, VOYAGER demonstrates strong in-context lifelong learning capabilities. It can construct
an ever-growing skill library of action programs that are reusable, interpretable, and generalizable
to novel tasks. We evaluate VOYAGER systematically against other LLM-based agent techniques
(e.g., ReAct [29], Reflexion [30], AutoGPT [28]) in MineDojo [23], an open-source Minecraft AI
framework. VOYAGER outperforms prior SOTA by obtaining 3.3× more unique items, unlocking key
tech tree milestones up to 15.3× faster, and traversing 2.3× longer distances. We further demonstrate
that VOYAGER is able to utilize the learned skill library in a new Minecraft world to solve novel tasks
from scratch, while other methods struggle to generalize.
2
Method
VOYAGER consists of three novel components: (1) an automatic curriculum (Sec. 2.1) that suggests
objectives for open-ended exploration, (2) a skill library (Sec. 2.2) for developing increasingly
complex behaviors, and (3) an iterative prompting mechanism (Sec. 2.3) that generates executable
code for embodied control. Full prompts are presented in Appendix, Sec. A.
2.1
Automatic Curriculum
Embodied agents encounter a variety of objectives with different complexity levels in open-ended
environments. An automatic curriculum offers numerous benefits for open-ended exploration, ensur-
ing a challenging but manageable learning process, fostering curiosity-driven intrinsic motivation
for agents to learn and explore, and encouraging the development of general and flexible problem-
solving strategies [42–44]. Our automatic curriculum capitalizes on the internet-scale knowledge
contained within GPT-4 by prompting it to provide a steady stream of new tasks or challenges. The
curriculum unfolds in a bottom-up fashion, allowing for considerable adaptability and responsiveness
to the exploration progress and the agent’s current state (Fig. 3). As VOYAGER progresses to harder
self-driven goals, it naturally learns a variety of skills, such as “mining a diamond”.
3
