Program Description
Skill Library
Top-5 Relevant Skills
Program Generated by GPT-4
Task: Craft Iron Pickaxe
Key
Add
Retrieve
Value
Skill Library
Query
How to craft an iron pickaxe in 
Minecraft?
To craft an iron pickaxe, you 
need to 3 iron ingots and 2 
sticks. Once you have gathered 
the materials, ....
----------------------------------
         Environment Feedback
Mine Wood  Log
Make Crafting Table
Craft Wooden Pickaxe
Craft Stone Sword
Make Furnace
...
Combat Cow
Cook Steak
Craft Iron Axe
Combat Zombie
Smelt Iron Ingot
Craft Stick
Make Crafting Table
Make Furnace
Craft Wooden Pickaxe
GPT-3.5
Embedding
Embedding
GPT-3.5
Figure 4: Skill library. Top: Adding a new skill. Each time GPT-4 generates and verifies a new
skill, we add it to the skill library, represented by a vector database. The key is the embedding vector
of the program description (generated by GPT-3.5), while the value is the program itself. Bottom:
Skill retrieval. When faced with a new task proposed by the automatic curriculum, we first leverage
GPT-3.5 to generate a general suggestion for solving the task, which is combined with environment
feedback as the query context. Subsequently, we perform querying to identify the top-5 relevant skills.
The input prompt to GPT-4 consists of several components:
(1) Directives encouraging diverse behaviors and imposing constraints,
such as
“My ultimate goal is to discover as many diverse things as possible
...
The next task should not be too hard since I may not have the
necessary resources or have learned enough skills to complete it
yet.”;
(2) The agent’s current state, including inventory, equipment, nearby blocks and entities,
biome, time, health and hunger bars, and position;
(3) Previously completed and failed tasks, reflecting the agent’s current exploration progress
and capabilities frontier;
(4) Additional context: We also leverage GPT-3.5 to self-ask questions based on the agent’s
current state and exploration progress and self-answer questions. We opt to use GPT-3.5
instead of GPT-4 for standard NLP tasks due to budgetary considerations.
2.2
Skill Library
With the automatic curriculum consistently proposing increasingly complex tasks, it is essential to
have a skill library that serves as a basis for learning and evolution. Inspired by the generality, inter-
pretability, and universality of programs [45], we represent each skill with executable code that scaf-
folds temporally extended actions for completing a specific task proposed by the automatic curriculum.
The input prompt to GPT-4 consists of the following components:
(1) Guidelines
for
code
generation,
such
as
“Your function will be reused
for building more complex functions.
Therefore, you should make
it generic and reusable.”;
(2) Control primitive APIs, and relevant skills retrieved from the skill library, which are
crucial for in-context learning [36–38] to work well;
(3) The generated code from the last round, environment feedback, execution errors, and
critique, based on which GPT-4 can self-improve (Sec. 2.3);
(4) The agent’s current state, including inventory, equipment, nearby blocks and entities,
biome, time, health and hunger bars, and position;
4
