I cannot make stick because I need:  2 more planks
I cannot make stone_shovel because I need:  2 more stick
throw new Error(`No item named ${name}`);
No item named acacia_axe
at line 18:await craftItem(bot, "acacia_axe", 1);
Environment Feedback
Execution Error
GPT-4
GPT-4
Figure 5: Left: Environment feedback. GPT-4 realizes it needs 2 more planks before crafting sticks.
Right: Execution error. GPT-4 realizes it should craft a wooden axe instead of an acacia axe since
there is no acacia axe in Minecraft. We only display the partial prompt for brevity. The full prompt
structure for code generation is in Appendix, Sec. A.4.
(5) Chain-of-thought prompting [46] to do reasoning before code generation.
We iteratively refine the program through a novel iterative prompting mechanism (Sec. 2.3), in-
corporate it into the skill library as a new skill, and index it by the embedding of its description
(Fig. 4, top). For skill retrieval, we query the skill library with the embedding of self-generated task
plans and environment feedback (Fig. 4, bottom). By continuously expanding and refining the skill
library, VOYAGER can learn, adapt, and excel in a wide spectrum of tasks, consistently pushing the
boundaries of its capabilities in the open world.
2.3
Iterative Prompting Mechanism
We introduce an iterative prompting mechanism for self-improvement through three types of feedback:
(1) Environment feedback, which illustrates the intermediate progress of program execution
(Fig. 5, left). For example, “I cannot make an iron chestplate because I need:
7 more iron ingots” highlights the cause of failure in crafting an iron chestplate. We use
bot.chat() inside control primitive APIs to generate environment feedback and prompt
GPT-4 to use this function as well during code generation;
(2) Execution errors from the program interpreter that reveal any invalid operations or syntax
errors in programs, which are valuable for bug fixing (Fig. 5, right);
(3) Self-verification for checking task success. Instead of manually coding success checkers
for each new task proposed by the automatic curriculum, we instantiate another GPT-4
agent for self-verification. By providing VOYAGER’s current state and the task to GPT-4,
we ask it to act as a critic [47–49] and inform us whether the program achieves the task.
In addition, if the task fails, it provides a critique by suggesting how to complete the task
(Fig. 6). Hence, our self-verification is more comprehensive than self-reflection [30] by both
checking success and reflecting on mistakes.
During each round of code generation, we execute the generated program to obtain environment
feedback and execution errors from the code interpreter, which are incorporated into GPT-4’s prompt
for the next round of code refinement. This iterative process repeats until self-verification validates
5
