Mine Wood  Log
Make Crafting Table
Craft Stone Sword
Craft Shield
Make Furnace
Cook Steak
Combat Zombie
     Mine Wood Log
Make Crafting Table
Combat 
Zombie
Mine Diamond
New 
Task
Code as 
Actions
Refine Program
Env Feedback
Execution Errors
Update 
Exploration 
Progress
Skill 
Retrieval
Add New Skill
Automatic Curriculum
Iterative Prompting Mechanism
Skill Library
Environment
Self-Verification
Figure 2: VOYAGER consists of three key components: an automatic curriculum for open-ended
exploration, a skill library for increasingly complex behaviors, and an iterative prompting mechanism
that uses code as action space.
1
Introduction
Building generally capable embodied agents that continuously explore, plan, and develop new skills
in open-ended worlds is a grand challenge for the AI community [1–5]. Classical approaches
employ reinforcement learning (RL) [6, 7] and imitation learning [8–10] that operate on primitive
actions, which could be challenging for systematic exploration [11–15], interpretability [16–18], and
generalization [19–21]. Recent advances in large language model (LLM) based agents harness the
world knowledge encapsulated in pre-trained LLMs to generate consistent action plans or executable
policies [16, 22, 19]. They are applied to embodied tasks like games and robotics [23–27], as well as
NLP tasks without embodiment [28–30]. However, these agents are not lifelong learners that can
progressively acquire, update, accumulate, and transfer knowledge over extended time spans [31, 32].
Let us consider Minecraft as an example. Unlike most other games studied in AI [33, 34, 10],
Minecraft does not impose a predefined end goal or a fixed storyline but rather provides a unique
playground with endless possibilities [23]. Minecraft requires players to explore vast, procedurally
generated 3D terrains and unlock a tech tree using gathered resources. Human players typically start
by learning the basics, such as mining wood and cooking food, before advancing to more complex
tasks like combating monsters and crafting diamond tools. We argue that an effective lifelong learning
agent should have similar capabilities as human players: (1) propose suitable tasks based on its
current skill level and world state, e.g., learn to harvest sand and cactus before iron if it finds itself in
a desert rather than a forest; (2) refine skills based on environmental feedback and commit mastered
skills to memory for future reuse in similar situations (e.g. fighting zombies is similar to fighting
spiders); (3) continually explore the world and seek out new tasks in a self-driven manner.
Towards these goals, we introduce VOYAGER, the first LLM-powered embodied lifelong learning
agent to drive exploration, master a wide range of skills, and make new discoveries continually
without human intervention in Minecraft. VOYAGER is made possible through three key modules
(Fig. 2): 1) an automatic curriculum that maximizes exploration; 2) a skill library for storing
and retrieving complex behaviors; and 3) a new iterative prompting mechanism that generates
executable code for embodied control. We opt to use code as the action space instead of low-level
motor commands because programs can naturally represent temporally extended and compositional
actions [16, 22], which are essential for many long-horizon tasks in Minecraft. VOYAGER interacts
with a blackbox LLM (GPT-4 [35]) through prompting and in-context learning [36–38]. Our approach
bypasses the need for model parameter access and explicit gradient-based training or finetuning.
More specifically, VOYAGER attempts to solve progressively harder tasks proposed by the automatic
curriculum, which takes into account the exploration progress and the agent’s state. The curriculum
is generated by GPT-4 based on the overarching goal of “discovering as many diverse things as
possible”. This approach can be perceived as an in-context form of novelty search [39, 40]. VOYAGER
incrementally builds a skill library by storing the action programs that help solve a task successfully.
2
